# Compilers/Interpreters

Context free grammars are a set of rules which describe a set of strings which can be generated by those rules. CFGs are central to creating compilers for programming languages, as they are used to parse languages into meaningful symbols which are then executed by the program. 

This project is a brief introduction into lexer-builders (flex files) and parser generators. The flex files describe the tokens of the language, formulated explicitly in the rules section, which then generates the meaningful parts of the language. For example, an integer is described as {digit}+, meaning that a string one or more digits will define an integer. Having set up these tokens, that is, if the lexer can successsfully parse a given input into these constitutent parts, then we can link the lexer to the parser, which will take these tokens and parse statements, which can then correspond to a function which computes, assigns, or any other operation we want our programming language to have. 

For example, let's suppose that we want our programming language to be able to recognize for loops, and we'll use the syntax used in Java. Our lexer would need the power to recognize the parts which make up the declaration, the set {"for", "(", ")","{","}"}, but also statements like "i=0" which is itself made up of the set {"i","=","0"}. This latter set is expanded to include strings, integers, and floats. These declarations can be found on lines 39-60 in myLang.lex.

Given that the flex file specifies these symbols, the parser then takes these symbols and parses combinations of these symbols. Line 97 of myLang.y specifies the syntax for a for loop declaration, with its constituent parts specified in the following lines. The idea here is that we tell the parser what a for loop should look like, using the tokens specified in the flex file, so that given a string to parse, it can use the rules of the context-free grammar to find a derivation for that string, or reject it as a string not in the language. This will give us a parser which recognizes well formed statements of the language which dictates the formaat we want our programmaming language to follow. 

To run:
- Open the terminal and cd to the folder which contains myLang.lex and myLang.y
- type "bison -d myLang.y" at the prompt
- type "flex -o example1.lex.c example1.lex" 
- type "gcc -o example1 example1.lex.c example1.tab.c -ll -lm"

These steps above take the bison and flex files and create the C code and lexical analyzer, then compiles the C program and creates an executable. To finish, type "./myLang". This will open the prompt to type in strings which will be parsed. 







This project was created as part of an assignment in Theory of Computation, taught by Daniel Kluver Fall 2018 at Macalester College. I received his help and guidance, and the instructions for running the executable are taken directly from his project description. I also received the help of my teammates Juliet, Paige, and Tom. 


